[Isaiah 63:1-19]
The Gospel. Mark xiv. AFTER two daies was Easter [=Passover], and the dayes of swet [=unleavened] bread. And the hie Priestes and the Scribes sought how they might take him by crafte, and put him to death. But they sayde; not in the feaste daye, leste any busynes arise among the people. And when he was at Bethany, in the house of Symon the leper, even as he sate at meat, there came a woman havying an Alabaster boxe of oyntment called Narde, that was pure and costly; and she brake the boxe, and powred it upon his head. And there were some that were not contente within themselves, and sayde: what neded this waste of oyntment? for it mighte have been solde for more than ccc pence, and have been geven unto the poore. And they grudged agaynste her. And Jesus sayde: let her alone, why trouble ye her? She hath done a good worke on me: for ye have poore with you alwayes, and whensoever ye wyll ye may do them good; but me have ye not alwayes. She hath done that she coulde, she came aforehand to anoynte my body to the buriyng. Verely I saye unto you; whersoever. this Gospell shalbe preached throughout the whole worlde, this also that she hath done, shalbe rehearsed in remembraunce of her. And Judas Iscarioth, one of the xii, went awaye unto the hye priestes to betraye hym unto them. When they hearde that they were glad, and promised that they woulde geve him money. And he soughte howe he mighte conveniently betraye him. And the fyrste daye of swete bread, (when they offered Passeover,) his disciples sayde unto him: where wilt thou that we go and prepare, that thou maiest eat the Passeover? And he sent furth two of his disciples, and sayd unto them; go ye into the citie, and there shall mete you a man bearyng a pitcher of water, folowe him. And whithersoever he goeth in, saye ye unto the goodman of the house, the master sayth; where is the gest chamber, where I shall eate Passeover with my disciples? And he wil shew you a great parlour paved [=furnished] and prepared: there make ready for us. And hys Discyples wente furth, and came into the citie, and founde as he had sayd unto them: and they made ready the passeover. And when it was now eventide he came with the xii. And as they sate at boorde, and did eate, Jesus sayd, verely I say unto you, one of you (that eateth with me) shall betraye me. And they began to be sory, and to say to him one by one; is it I? and another sayd, is it I? he aunswered and sayd unto them: it is one of the xii, even he that dippeth with me in the platter. The sonne of man truely goeth, as it is written of him, but woe to that man by whome the sonne of man is betrayed: Good were it for that man if he had never bene borne. And as they dyd eate, Jesus tooke breade, and when he had geven thankes, he brake it, and gave to them, and sayd: Take, eate, this is my bodye. And he toke the cup, and when he had geven thankes he tooke it to them, and they all dranke of it. And he sayd unto them, Thys is my bloude of the new testament, whiche is shed for many. Verelye I saye unto you, I will drynke no more of the fruycte of the vyne, untyll that day that I drinke it newe in the kingdome of God. And when they had sayde grace, they wente oute to the mount Olivete. And Jesus sayeth unto them, all ye shall be offended [=fall into sinful ways] because of me, this night. For it is written; I will smite the shepeherd and the shepe shall bee skatered: but after that I am risen agayn, I will goe into Galile before you. Peter sayd unto him; and though all men be offended, yet wil not I. And Jesus sayeth unto him; verely I say unto the, that this day, even in this night before the Cocke krowe twise, thou shalt denie me thre times. But he spake more vehementlye: no, if I shoulde dye with thee, I will not deny thee. Lykewise also sayde they all. And they came into a place whiche was named Gethsemany: and he sayd to hys disciples; sit ye here, while I goe asyde and pray. And he taketh with hym Peter, and James, and John, and began to waxe abashed and to be in an agonye, and sayd unto them My soule is heavy, even unto the death; tary ye here, and watche. And he wente furth a litle, and fell downe flat on the ground, and prayed: that if it were possible, the houre might passe from hym. And he sayd; Abba father, al thinges are possible unto the, take away this cup from me; neverthelesse, not that I will, but that thou wilte bee doone. And he came and founde them sleping, and sayth to Peter: Simon slepest thou? Couldeste thou not watche one houre? watche ye and pray, leste ye enter into temptacion, the spirite truely is ready, but the flesh is weake. And again he went aside and praied, and spake the same wordes. And he returned and found them aslepe agayne, for their iyes were heavye, neyther wiste [=knew] they what to aunswere him. And he came the third time and sayde unto them: slepe hencefoorthe, and take your ease, it is enoughe. The houre is come, beholde, the sonne of man is betrayed into the handes of sinners: Rise up, let us goe; loe, he that betrayeth me is at hande. And immediately while he yet spake, cummeth Judas, (which was one of the xii,) and with him a great noumber of people with sweordes and staves, from the hye priestes, and Scribes, and elders. And he that betrayed hym, had geven them a generall token, saiyng; whosoever I doe kysse, the same is he; take hym and leade hym awaye warely. And as sone as he was come, he goth streghtway to him, and saith unto him, Master, Master; and kissed him: and they laid their handes on hym, and toke hym. And one of them that stode by drewe out a sweord, and smote a servaunte of the hye prieste, and cut of his eare. And Jesus aunswered, and said unto them; ye be come out as unto a thefe with sweordes and staves for to take me: I was dayly with you in the temple teachyng, and ye toke me not: but these thynges come to passe that the Scriptures shoulde be fulfilled. And they al forsooke hym, and ranne awaie. And there folowed him a certaine yong man clothed in linnen upon the bare, and the yong men caughte hym, and he left his linnen garmente and fled from them naked. And they led Jesus awaye to the higheste pryeste of all, and with hym came all the hie priestes and the Elders and the Scribes. And Peter folowed hym a greate waye of, (even tyll he was come into the palace of the hye prieste,) and he sate with the servauntes, and warmed hymselfe at the fyre. And the hie priestes and all the counsaile sought for witnes against Jesu to put hym to deathe, and founde none: for manye bare false witnesse againste hym, but theyr witnesses agreed not together. And there arose certayn, and brought false witnes against hym, saiyng; wee hearde hym saye, I wyll destroye this temple that is made with handes, and within iii daies I wyll buylde another made withoute handes. But yet their witnesses agreed not together. And the hye prieste stode uppe among them, and asked Jesus saying; aunswerest thou nothyng? Howe is it that these beare witnesse against the? But he helde his peace, and answered nothing. Againe the hie prieste asked him, and said unto him; art thou Christ the sonne of the blessed? And Jesus said; I am. And ye shal see the sonne of manne sitting on the righte hande of power, and comming in the cloudes of heaven. Then the hie priest rent his clothes, and said, what ned we any further of wytnesses? ye have heard blasphemy, what thynke ye? And they all condemned him to be worthy of death. And some began to spyt at hym, and to cover his face, and to beate hym with fystes, and to saye unto hym; arede [=prophesy], and the servauntes buffeted hym on the face. And as Peter was beneth in the palace, there came one of the wenches of the hieste prieste, and when she sawe Peter warmyng himselfe, she loked on hym, and said; waste not thou also with Jesus of Nazareth? And he deined, saying, I knowe hym not, neyther wote [=know] I what thou sayest. And he went out into the porche, and the Cock krewe. And a damosel (when she sawe him) began again to saye to them that stode by: thys is one of them. And he denied it againe. And anone after they that stode by, said againe unto Peter: surely thou art one of them, for thou art of Galile, and thy speche agreeth therto. But he beganne to curse and to sweare, saying, I knowe not this man of whome ye speake. And agayne the Cocke krewe, and Peter remembred the worde that Jesus had sayd unto hym; before the Cocke crowe twyse, thou shalt deny me thre tymes. And he began to wepe.
[Mark 14:1-72]
[Isaiah 50:4-11]
[Mark 15:1-47]
[Hebrews 9:16-28]
The Gospel. Luke xxii. THE feast of swete [=unleavened] bread drew nye, which is called Easter [=Passover], and the hye priestes and Scribes sought howe they myght kill him; for they feared the people. Then entred Sathan into Judas, whose sirname was Iscarioth (whiche was of the numbre of the xii) and he went his waye and commoned with the hye priestes and officers, how he might betray hym unto them. And they were glad, and promysed to geve him moneye. And he consented, and sought oportunitie to betraye him unto them when the people were awaye. Then came the daye of swete breade, when of necessitie passeover must be offred. And he sent Peter and John, saying; go and prepare us the passeover, that we maye eate. They sayed unto him; where wilt thou that we prepare? And he saied unto them; behold, when ye entre into the citie, there shall a man mete you bearing a pitcher of water, him folowe into the same house that he entreth in, and ye shall saye unto the good man of the house; the maister saieth unto the; where is the gest-chambre, where I shall eate the passeover with my disciples? And he shall shewe you a greate parlour paved [=furnished]; there make ready. And they went, and found as he had sayed unto them, and they made ready the passeover. And when the houre was come, he sat doune, and the xii Apostles with him. And he sayed unto them; I have inwardly desired to eate this passeover with you before that I suffre. For I saye unto you; henceforth I wyll not eate of it any more, untill it be fulfilled in the kingdome of God. And he tooke the cup, and gave thankes, and sayed; Take this and devide it among you. For I saye unto you; I wyll not drinke of the fruite of the vine, untill the kingdome of God come. And he toke bread, and when he had geven thankes, he brake it, and gave unto them, saying; This is my body, whiche is geven for you: This do in the remembraunce of me. Likewyse also when he had supped, he tooke the cup, saying; This cup is the new testamente in my bloude, whiche is shed for you. Yet beholde, the hande of him that betraieth me is with me on the table. And truely the sonne of man gooeth as it is appoynted; but woe unto that manne by whom he is betrayed. And they began to enquire among themselfes which of them it was that should do it. And there was a striefe among them, whiche of them shoulde seine to bee greatteste. And he sayde unto them; the kynges of nacions reigne over them, and they that have authoritye upon them, are called gracious Lordes: but ye shall not so bee. But he that is greatteste among you, shal bee as the yonger, and he that is chiefe shalbe as he that doth minister. For whether is greater, he that sitteth at meate, or he that serveth? Is it not he that sitteth at meate? But I am among you, as he that ministreth. Ye are they which have bydden [=remained] with me in my temptacions. And I appointe unto you a kyngdome, as my father hath apointed to me, that ye may eate and drynke at my table in my kyngdome, and sitte on seates, judgyng the xii tribes of Israell. And the lorde said; Simon, Simon behold, Sathan hath desired to sift you, as it were wheat: But I have praied for thee, that thy faith fayle not: And when thou arte converted, strength [strenghthen] thy brethren. And he saide unto hym; Lorde, I am readye to go with thee into prieson, and to death. And he said; I tel thee Peter, the Cocke shall not krow this daye, tyl thou have thrise denied that thou knoweste me. And he sayde unto them; when I sent you without wallette, and scrip [=bag], and shoes, lacked ye any thyng? And they said, no. Then saide he unto them; but nowe he that hath a wallette, lette him take it uppe, and lykewyse hys scrippe. And he that hath no sworde, let hym sell his coate, and by one. For I saye unto you, that yet the same whiche is written must be performed in me; even among the wicked was he reputed: For those thinges whiche are written of me have an ende. And they sayde: lorde, behold, here are ii swordes, and he saide unto them, it is ynoughe. And he came oute, and wente (as he was wonte) to Mounte Olivete. And the disciples folowed hym. And when he came to the place, he saide unto them; praye, leste ye fal into temptacion. And he gate hymselfe from them aboute a stones caste, and kneled doune and praied, saiyng; Father, if thou wilte, remove thys cup from me: Neverthelesse, not my will, but thyne bee fulfilled. And there appeared an Aungel unto hym from heaven, coumfortyng hym. And he was in an agony and prayed the lenger; and his sweate was like droppes of bloud, trickling down to the ground. And when he arose from prayer, and was come to hys disciples, he founde them slepyng for heavinesse, and he sayde unto them; why slepe ye? Ryse and praye, leste ye fall into temptacion. Whyle he yet spake, beholde, there came a company, and he that was called Judas, one of the xii, went before them, and preased [pressed] nye unto Jesus, to kisse him. But Jesus sayde unto him; Judas, betrayeste thou the sonne of man with a kysse? When they whiche were about hym sawe what woulde folowe, they sayde unto him; Lorde, shall we smyte with the sweorde? And one of them smote a servaunte of the hye prieste, and stroke of his right eare. Jesus aunswered and sayde: suffre ye thus farre foorth [far forth]. And when he touched hys eare, he healed hym. Then Jesus sayde unto the hye priestes, and rulers of the temple, and the Elders, whiche were come to him. Ye be come out as unto a thefe, with sweordes and staves. When I was dayly with you in the temple, ye stretched foorth no handes agaynste me: but thys is even your very houre, and the power of darkenes. Then toke they him and led hym, and brought him to the hye priestes house. But Peter folowed afarre of. And when they had kindled a fyer in the middes of the palace, and were set downe together; Peter also sate downe among them. But when one of the wenches behelde him, as he sate by the fyer. (and loked upon him,) she sayd; this same felowe was also with hym. And he denyed him, saying: woman, I knowe him not. And after a litle whyle, another sawe him, and sayde: thou art also of them. And Peter sayd; man, I am not. And about the space of an houre after, another affirmed, saying; verely, thys felowe was with him also, for he is of Galile. And Peter said, man, I wot [=know] not what thou sayeste. And immediately whyle he yet spake, the Cocke krew. And the Lorde turned backe and looked upon Peter. And Peter remembred the word of the lord, how he had sayde unto him; before the Cocke krowe thou shalt denye me thrise: and Peter wente out and wept bitterly. And the men that toke Jesus mocked him, and smote him:and when they had blindfolded him, they stroke him on the face, and asked hym, saying; arede [=prophesy], who is he that smote thee? And many other thynges despitefully sayde they agaynst him. And as sone as it was daye, the Elders of the people, and the hye priestes and Scrybes, came together, and led hym into theyr counsell, saying; Art thou very Christ? tell us. And he sayd unto them, if I tell you ye will not beleve me, and if I aske you, you will not answer me, nor let me goe: hereafter shal the sonne of man sit on the right hande of the power of god. Then sayd they all; Art thou then the sonne of god? He sayde: ye saye that I am. And they sayd; what nede we of any further witnes? for we ourselves have heard of his owne mouth.
[Luke 22:1-71]
[Maundy Thursday] * 1549 only
[1 Cor. 11:17-34]
[Luke 23:1-56]
* 1549 only "Collects" in 1552, 1559.
Rubric and title in 1549 only.
[Hebrews 10:1-25]
The Gospel. John xviii. xix. WHEN Jesus had spoken these woordes, he went furth with his disciples over the broke Cedron [=Kidron valley] where was a garden, into the whiche he entred with his disciples. Judas also whiche betrayed him, knewe the place: for Jesus oftetymes resorted thither with hys disciples. Judas then, after he had received a bend [band] of men, (and ministers of the hye priestes and Phariseis,) came thither with Lanterns and fyerbrandes and weapons. And Jesus, knowing al thinges that should come on him, went furth, and said unto them, whome seke ye? They answered him; Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus sayeth unto them; I am he. Judas also whiche betrayed him, stoode with them. As sone then as he had sayde unto them; I am he, they went backeward, and fel to the ground. Then asked he them again; whome seke ye? They saide: Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus aunswered; I have tolde you that I am he. If ye seke me therfore, let these goe theyr way: that the saying might be fulfilled, whiche he spake; Of them whiche thou gavest me, have I not lost one. Then Simon Peter having a sword, drew it, and smote the hye priestes servaunt, and cut of his right eare. The servauntes name was Malchus. Therfore sayeth Jesus unto Peter, put up thy sweorde into thy sheathe: shall I not drinke of the cup whiche my. father hath geven me? Then the cumpany and the capitayne, and the ministers of the Jewes, toke Jesus, and bound him, and led him away to Anna first; for he was father in law to Cayphas, whiche was the hye prieste the same yere. Cayphas was he that gave counsel to the Jewes, that it was expedient that one man shoulde dye for the people. And Simon Peter folowed Jesus, and so dyd another disciple: that disciple was knowen to the hye priest, and went in with Jesus into the palace of the hye priest. But Peter stoode at the doore without. Then wente out the other disciple, (whiche was knowen to the hye priest,) and spake to the damosell that kept the doore, and broughte in Peter. Then said the damosel that kept the doore unto Peter; Art not thou also one of this mans disciples? he sayd, I am not. The servauntes and ministers stode there, whiche had made a fyer of coales; for it was colde, and they warmed themselves. Peter also stode among them, and warmed himselfe. The hye priest then asked Jesus of his disciples, and of hys doctryne. Jesus aunswered him; I spake openly in the worlde, I ever taughte in the Sinagoge, and in the temple, whither al the Jewes have resorted, and in secrete have I said nothyng. Why askest thou me? Aske them whiche heard me, what I sayde unto them. Beholde they can tell what I sayde. When he had thus spoken, one of the ministers, whiche stoode by, smote Jesus on the face, saying; Aunswerest thou the hie priest so? Jesus aunswered him; If I have eivill spoken, beare witnesse of the evill: But if I have well spoken, why smitest thou me? And Annas sent him bounde unto Cayphas, the hye priest. Simon Peter stoode and warmed himselfe. Then sayde they unto him. Art not thou also one of his disciples? he denied it, and said; I am not. One of the servantes of the hye priestes (his cosin whose eare Peter smote of) said unto him; did not I se thee in the garden with him? Peter therfore denied againe, and immediatly the Cocke krewe. Then led they Jesus from Cayphas into the hal of judgement. It was in the morning; and they themselfes went not into the judgement hall, leste thei should be defiled, but that thei might eate the Passeover. Pylate then went out to them and sayd; what accusacion bryng you against this man? They answered and sayd unto him; If he were not an evildoer, we would not have delivered hym unto thee. Then sayed Pylate unto them; take ye him, and judge him after your owne lawe. The Jewes therfore sayd unto him; It is not lawful for us to put any man to death: that the woordes of Jesus myght bee fulfilled, whiche he spake, signifying what death he should dye. Then Pilate entred into the judgement hal again, and called Jesus, and sayd unto him; Art thou the king of the Jewes? Jesus answered; sayest thou that of thyself, or did other tel it thee of me? Pilate answered; am I a Jew? Thine owne nacion and hye priestes have delivered thee unto me: what hast thou done? Jesus answered; my kingdome is not of this worlde: if my kingdome were of this worlde, then woulde my ministers surely fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jewes: but now is my kyngdom not from hence. Pilate therfore sayd unto hym; Art thou a kyng then? Jesus answered; thou sayest that I am a kyng. For this cause was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I shoulde bear wytnes unto the trueth. And all that are of the trueth, heare my voyce. Pylate sayd unto hym, what thyng is trueth? And when he had sayd this, he went out again unto the Jewes, and sayth unto the; I finde in him no cause at al. Ye have a custome, that I should deliver you one loce at Easter [=Passover]: wil ye that I loce unto you the king of the Jewes? Then cryed they all again, saying: Not him, but Barrabas: the same Barrabas was a murtherer. Then Pilate toke Jesus therfore and scourged hym. And the souldiers wound a croune of thornes, and put it on his head. And thei did on hym a purple garment, and came unto hym and sayed; hayle kyng of the Jewes: and they smote hym on the face. Pylate went furth agayne, and sayed unto them; behold, I bring him furth to you, that ye may knowe that I finde no faulte in hym. Then came Jesus forth, wearyng a croune of thorne, and a robe of purple. And he sayth unto them; beholde the man. When the hye priestes therfore and ministers sawe hym, they cryed; crucifie hym, crucifye him. Pylate sayeth unto them; take ye hym, and crucifye him, for I fynde no cause in hym. The Jewes aunswered hym; we have a lawe, and by oure lawe, he ought to dye; because he made himselfe the sonne of God. When Pilate heard that saying, he was the more afrayde: and went agayne into the judgement halle, and sayeth unto Jesus; whence art thou? But Jesus gave him none answer. The sayd Pilate unto him; Speakest thou not unto me? knowest thou not that I have power to crucifie thee, and have power to looce thee? Jesus answered; Thou couldest have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above. Therfore he that delivered me unto thee, hath the more sinne. And from thencefurth sought Pilate meanes to looce him: but the Jews cryed, saying: yf thou let hym goc, thou arte not Cesars frende: for whosoever maketh hymselfe a kyng is against Cesar. When Pilate heard that saying, he brought Jesus furth, and sate downe to geve sentence m a place that is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrue tong Gabbatha. It was the preparyng daye of Easter, aboute the vi houre. And he sayeth unto the Jewes; beholde your kyng. They cryed, saying; away with hym, away with hym, crucyfye hym. Pylate sayeth unto them; shall I crucyfy your king? The hye priestes aunswered; we have no kyng but Cesar. Then delivered he him unto them to be crucified. And they tooke Jesus, and ledde him away. And he bare his crosse, and wente furthe into a place whiche is called the place of dead mennes sculles, but in Hebrue, Golgotha: where they crucifyed hym, and two other with hym, on eyther syde one, and Jesus in the middest. And Pilate wrote a tytle, and put it on the crosse. The wrytyng was, Jesus of Nazareth kyng of the Jewes. This tytle read many of the Jewes: for the place where Jesus was crucified was nye to the cytie. And it was wrytten in Hebrue, Greke, and Latyn. Then sayed the hye priestes of the Jewes to Pilate; wryte not king of the Jewes, but that he sayed, I am kyng of the Jewes. Pylate aunswered; what I have written, that have I written. Then the souldiers, when they had crucifyed Jesus, toke his garmentes, and made iiii partes, to every souldiour a part, and also his coate. The coate was without seine [seam], wrought upon throughout: They sayed therfore among themselves; let us not devyde it, but cast lottes for it, who shall have it. That the scripture might be fulfylled, saying; They have parted my raymente among them, and for my coate did they cast lottes. And the souldiours did suche thynges indede. There stoode by the crosse of Jesus, his mother and his mothers sister Mary the wyfe of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. When Jesus therfore sawe his mother, and the discyple standyng, whom he loved, he sayeth unto his mother; woman, behold thy sonne. Then sayd he to the disciple, beholde thy mother. And from that houre the disciple toke hir for his owne. After these thynges, Jesus knowing that all thynges were nowe performed, that the scripture myght be fulfylled, he sayeth; I thirst. So there stoode a vessell by full of vineger: therfore they fylled a sponge with vineger, and wounde it aboute with Isope [hyssop], and put it to his mouthe. As sone as Jesus then receyved of the vineger, he sayed; It is finished, and bowed his head, and gave up the gost. The Jewes therfore, because it was the preparyng of the Sabboth, that the bodyes should not remayne upon the crosse on the Sabboth daye (for that Sabboth daye was an hye daye) besought Pylate, that their legges might be broken, and that they might be taken downe. Then came the souldiours, and brake the legges of the firste and of the other whiche was crucified with hym. But when they came to Jesus, and sawe that he was dead already, they brake not his legges: but one of the souldiours with a speare thrust him into the syde, and forthwith there came out bloud and water. And he that sawe it bare recorde, and his recorde is true. And he knoweth that he sayeth true, that ye might beleve also. For these thynges were done that the scripture should be fulfilled; ye shall not breake a bone of hym. And againe another scripture sayth; they shall loke upon him whom they have pearced. After this Joseph of Aramathia (which was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for feare of the Jewes) besought Pylate that he might take downe the bodye of Jesus. And Pylate gave hym lycense: He came therfore and tooke the bodye of Jesus. And there came also Nicodemus, (whiche at the begynning came to Jesus by night) and brought of Myrre [myrrh] and Aloes mingled together, aboute an hundreth pounde weight. Then tooke they the body of Jesus, and wound it in lynnen clothes with the odoures [=spices], as the maner of the Jewes is to burye. And in the place where he was crucified, there was a garden; and in the garden a newe Sepulchre, wherein was never manne layde. There layde they Jesus therfore because of the preparyng of the Sabboth of the Jewes, for the Sepulchre was nye at hande. [At Evensong. � The First Lesson, Isa. liii. unto the end.]*
[John 18:1-19:42]
* 1549 only
[1 Peter 3:17-22]
The Gospel. Matt xxvii. WHEN the Even [evening] was come, there came a riche man of Aramathia named Joseph, whiche also was Jesus disciple. He went unto Pilate and begged the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commaunded the body to be delivered. And when Joseph had taken the bodye, he wrapped it in a cleane lynnen clothe, and layde it in his newe Tombe, whiche he had hewen out even in the rocke, and rolled a great stone to the doore of the Sepulchre, and departed. And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary sytting over against the Sepulchre. The nexte day that foloweth the day of preparing, the high priestes and Phariseis came together unto Pilate, saying; Sir, we remembre that this deceyver sayed whyle he was yet alyve; After iii dayes I wil rise agayne: Commaunde therfore that the Sepulchre be made sure untyll the thirde daye, leste his disciples come and steale hym awaye, and say unto the people, he is risen from the dead: and the last erroure shalbe worse then the firste. Pylate sayed unto them: ye have the watche, goe your way, make it as sure as ye can. So thei went and made the Sepulchre sure with the watchemenne, and sealed the stone.
[Matthew 27:57-66]
