* 1549 only.
[Joel 2:12-17]
[Matthew 6:16-21]
"with the Father and the holy Ghost, one God world without end. Amen." added sometime after 1604.
[2 Cor. 6:1-10]
[Matthew 4:1-11]
* added late 1500's
[1 Thess. 4:1-8]
[Matthew 15:21-28]
* added late 1500's
[Eph. 5:1-14]
The Gospell. Luke xi. JESUS was casting out a devel that was domme [dumb]. And when he had cast the devel, the domme spake, and the people wondered. But some of them saied, He casteth out devils through Belzebub, the chiefe of the devels. And other tempted him, and required of him a signe from heaven. But he knowyng their thoughtes, sayed unto them; Every kyngdome devided against itselfe, is desolate; and one house doth fall upon another. If Sathan also be devided againste hymselfe, howe shall his kyngdome endure? Because ye saye that I cast out devels through Beizebub: If I by the helpe of Beizebub caste oute devels, by whose helpe do your chyldren caste them oute? Therfore shall they be youre judges. But if I with the fynger of God caste out devels, no doubt the kingdome of God is come upon you. When a strong man armed watcheth his house; the thinges that he possesseth are in peace. But when a stronger than he commeth upon hym, he taketh from hym all his harnes [harness] (wherin he trusted) and devideth his goodes. He that is not with me, is against me. And he that gathereth not with me scattereth abrode. When the uncleane spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through drye places, sekyng rest. And when he fyndeth none, he sayeth: I will returne agayne into my house whence I came out. And when he commeth, he fyndeth it swepte and garnisshed. Then goeth he and taketh to hym vii. other spirites worse then him selfe; and they entre in and dwell there. And the ende of that man is worse than the beginning. And it fortuned that as he spake these thinges, a certaine woman of the company lifte up her voice, and saied unto hym: happy is the wombe that bare thee, and the pappes which gave thee sucke. But he sayd: yea, happy are they that heare the woorde of God and kepe it.
[Luke 11:14-28]
* added late 1500's
[Galatians 4:21-31]
[John 6:1-14]
* added late 1500's
[Hebrews 9:11-15]
[John 8:46-59]
[Palm Sunday]
[Phil. 2:5-11]
The Gospell. Matt. xxvi. xxvii. AND it came to passe, when Jesus had finished all these sayinges, he sayd unto his disciples: ye knowe that after two dayes shalbe Easter [=Passover], and the sonne of man shalbe delyvered over to be crucified. Then assembled together the chiefe Priestes, and the Scribes, and the Elders of the people unto the palace of the high priest, (which was called Cayphas,) and helde a counsayl that they might take Jesus by subteltie, and kill him. But they sayd: not on the holy daye, leste there be an uproare among the people. When Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the Leper, there came unto hym a woman havyng an Alabaster boxe of precious oyntment, and powred it on his head, as he sate at the bourde. But when his disciples sawe it, they had indignacion, saiyng, Whereto serveth this wast [waste]? This oynment might have been well solde and geven to the poore. When Jesus understode that, he sayd unto them: why trouble ye the woman? for she hath wrought a good worke upon me. For ye have the poore alwayes with you; but me ye shall not have alwayes. And in that she hath cast this oyntment on my body, she did it to bury me. Verely I say unto you: whersoever this gospell shalbe preached in al the worlde, there shall also this, that she hath done, be tolde for a memoriall of her. Then one of the xii (whiche was called Judas Iscarioth) went unto the chiefe priestes, and sayd unto them, what will ye geve me, and I will deliver hym unto you? And they appointed unto him xxx pieces of silver. And from that tyme furth he sought oportunitie to betray hym. The first day of swete [=unleavened] bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying unto him; where wilt thou that we prepare for thee, to eate the Passeover? And he sayd; Go into the citie, to suche a man, and say unto him, the Maister sayth; my tyme is at hand, I will kepe my Easter [=Passover] by thee with my disciples. And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them; and they made ready the passeover. When the even [evening] was come, he sate doune with the xii. And as they did eate, he sayd; Verely I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me. And they were exceding sorowful, and began every one of them to say unto him; Lorde, is it I? he aunswered and sayd; he that dippeth his had with me in the dishe, the same shal betraye me. The sonne of man truely goeth as it is written of him: but woe unto that man, by whom the sonne of man is betrayed. It had been good for that man if he had not been borne. Then Judas, which betraied him, answered and sayd; Maister, is it I? He said unto him, thou hast sayd. When they were eatyng, Jesus take bread, and when he had geven thankes, he brake it and gave it to the disciples, and sayd, Take, eat, this is my body. And he tooke the cuppe and thanked, and gave it them, saying; drinke ye all of this; For this is my bloud (whiche is of the newe testament) that is shed for many, for the remission of synnes. But I say unto you: I will not drinke hencefurth of this fruite of the vyne tree, untyll that day when I shall drynke it newe with you, in my fathers kyngdome. And when they had sayd grace, they went out unto mount Oliuete. Then sayth Jesus unto them; all ye shalbe offended [=fall into sinful ways] because of me this night. For it is written; I will smyte the shepherde, and the shepe of the flocke shalbe scattered abroade: but after I am rysen again, I will go before you into Galilee. Peter answered and sayd unto him: though all men be offended because of thee, yet wil not I be offended. Jesus sayd unto him; verely I say unto thee, That in this same night before the cocke crowe; thou shalt deny me thrise. Peter sayd unto him: yea, though I should dye with thee, yet will I not deny thee: lykewyse also said all the disciples. Then came Jesus with them unto a farme place, (which is called Gethsemane,) and sayd unto the disciples; Syt ye here, whyle I go and pray yonder. And he tooke with him Peter and the two sonnes of Zebede, and began to waxe sorowful and heavy. Then sayd Jesus unto them: My soule is heavy even unto the death: Tary ye here and watche with me. And he went a litle farther, and fell flat on his face, and prayed, saying; O my father if it be possible, let this cup passe frome me: neverthelesse not as I will, but as thou wilt. And he came unto the disciples, and found them aslepe, and sayd unto Peter, what, could ye not watche with me one houre? watche and praye, that ye entre not into temptacion: the spirite is willyng, but the fleshe is weake. He went away once againe and prayed, saying; O my father, yf this cup may not passe away from me, except I drinke of it, thy wil be fulfylled: and he came and found them aslepe agayne, for their eyes were heavy. And he left them, and went againe and prayed the third tyme, saying the same woordes. Then commeth he to his disciples, and sayth unto them, Slepe on now, and take your rest. Behold, the houre is at hand, and the sonne of man is betrayed into the handes of synners. Ryse, let us be goyng: behold, he is at hand that doth betray me. While he yet spake; lo, Judas one of the nombre of the xii, came, and with him a great multitude with sweordes and staves sent from the chief priestes and elders of the people. But he that betrayed hym, gave them a token, saying: whomsoever I kisse, the same is he, holde him fast. And furthwith he came to Jesus, and sayd, hayle Maister, and kyssed him. And Jesus sayd unto hym, frend, wherfore art thou come? Then came they, and layde handes on Jesus, and toke hym. And beholde, one of them whiche were with Jesus, stretched out his hand and drew his sworde, and stroke a servaunt of the hye Priest, and smote of his eare. Then sayd Jesus unto hym; put up thy sworde into the sheath: for all they that take the sworde, shall perishe with the sworde. Thynkest thou that I cannot nowe pray to my father, and he shall geve me even nowe more than xii legions of Angelles? But howe then shall the scriptures bee fulfylled? For thus must it be. In that same houre sayd Jesus to the multitude: ye be come out as it were to a thefe with swordes and staves, for to take me. I sate dayly with you teaching in the temple, and ye tooke me not. But all this is done, that the scriptures of the Prophets might be fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsoke him, and fled. And they toke Jesus and led him to Cayphas the hye Priest, where the Scribes and the Elders were assembled. But Peter folowed hym afar of unto the hye Priestes palace; and went in and sate with the servauntes, to see thende [the end]. The chiefe priestes and the elders and all the counsail sought false wytnesse against Jesus, (for to put hym to death,) but found none: yea, when many false wytnesses came, yet found they none. At the last came ii false wytnesses, and sayde: This felow sayd: I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to buylde it againe in iii days. And the chiefe priest arose, and sayd unto hym; aunswerest thou nothing? Why do these beare wytnes against thee? But Jesus helde his peace. And the chiefe priest aunswered and sayd unto him I charge thee by the lyving God, that thou tel us, whether thou be Christ the some of God. Jesus sayd unto him: thou hast sayd. Neverthelesse I say unto you: hereafter shall ye see the sonne of man sitting on the right hand of power, and comming in the cloudes of the skye. Then the hye priest rent his clothes, saying: he hath spoken blasphemy; what nede we of any mo wytnesses? Beholde, now ye have heard his blasphemy; what thynke ye? They aunswered and sayd: he is worthy to dye. Then did they spyt in his face, and buffeted him with fystes. And other smote him on the face with the palme of their handes, saying: tel us thou Christ, who is he that smote thee? Peter sate without in the palace, and a damosel came to him, saying: thou also wast with Jesus of Galile: but he denied before them al, saying; I wot [=know] not what thou sayest. When he was gone out into the porche, another wenche sawe him, and sayd unto them that were there; This felow was also with Jesus of Nazareth. And agayne he denyed with an othe [oath], saying: I do not know the man. And after a while came unto him they that stode by, and sayd unto Peter: surely thou art even one of them; for thy speche bewrayeth [betrayeth] thee. Then began he to cursse and to sweare, that he knewe not the man. And immediatly the cocke krewe. And Peter remembred the worde of Jesu, whiche sayd unto him; before the cocke krow, thou shalt deny me thrise: and he went out and wept bitterly. When the mornyng was come, all the chiefe priestes and the elders of the people helde a counsaill against Jesus, to put hym to death, and brought him bound, and delivered hym unto Poncius Pylate the deputie. Then Judas (whiche had betrayed him) seyng that he was condemned, repented himselfe, and brought againe the xxx plates [=pieces] of silver to the chiefe priestes and elders, saying; I have synned, betraying the innocent bloud. And they sayd; what is that to us? Se thou to that. And he cast downe the silver plates in the temple, and departed, and went and hanged himselfe. And the chief Priestes toke the silver plates, and said: It is not lawfull for to put them into the treasure, because it is the price of bloud. And thei toke councell, and bought with them a potters felde, to burie straungers in. Wherefore the felde is called Haceldema, that is, the felde of bloud, untill this day. Then was fulfilled that whiche was spoken by Jeremie [Jeremiah] the prophet, saying: and thei toke xxx silver plates, the price of him that was valued, whom they bought of the children of Israel, and gave them for the potters felde, as the Lord appointed me. Jesus stode before the deputie, and the deputie asked hym, saying, Art thou the king of the Jewes? Jesus sayed unto hym: thou sayest. And when he was accused of the chief priestes and elders, he answered nothyng. Then said Pilate unto hym: hearest thou not howe many witnesses they laye agaynste thee? And he answered him to never a worde, insomuche that the deputie marvayled greately. At that feaste, the deputie was woont to delyver unto the people a prisoner, whom they would desire. He had then a notable prisoner, called Barrabas. Therfore, when they were gathered together, Pylate sayd; whether wyll ye that I geve loce [loose] unto you, Barrabas, or Jesus whiche is called Christ? For he knewe that for envy they had delivered hym. When he was set doune to geve judgement, his wyfe sent unto him, saying, have thou nothyng to do with that just man: For I have suffred many thynges this day in my slepe because of hym. But the chiefe priestes and Elders persuaded the people that they shoulde aske Barrabas, and destroy Jesus. The deputie answered, and sayd unto them: whether of the twayne [=two] wyll ye that I let loce unto you? They sayd, Barrabas. Pylate sayd unto them, what shal I do then with Jesus, which is called Christ? They all sayd unto hym, let hym be crucified. The deputie sayd: what evill hath he done? But they cried the more, saying; let hym be crucified. When Pylate sawe that he could prevayle nothyng, but that more busynes was made, he toke water and washed his handes before the people, saying; I am innocent of the bloud of this just person, ye shall see. Then answered all the people and sayd; his bloud be on us, and on our children. Then let he Barrabas loce unto them, and skourged Jesus, and delivered hym to be crucified. Then the souldiers of the deputie toke Jesus into the common hall, and gathered unto hym all the company: and they stripped hym, and put on hym a purple robe, and platted [plaited] a croune of thornes, and put it upon his head, and a rede in his right hande, and bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying: hayle kyng of the Jewes: and when they had spyt upon him, thei toke the rede, and smote him on the head. And after that they had mocked him, they toke the robe of him agayne, and put his owne rayment on him, and led him away to crucifie him. And as they came out, they found a man of Cirene (named Symon) him they compelled to beare his crosse. And they came unto the place whiche is called Golgotha, that is to say (a place of dead men sculles) and gave hym vynegar to drynke myngled with gall. And when he had tasted therof, he would not drynke. When they had crucified hym, they parted his garmentes, and did cast lottes: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet; They parted my garmentes among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lottes. And they sate, and watched hym there, and set up over hys head the cause of his death, written; This is Jesus the kyng of the Jewes. Then were there ii theves crucified with him, one on the right hand, and another on the left. They that passed by revyled him waggyng their heades, and saying: thou that destroyedst the temple of God, and dyddest buylde it in thre daies, save thyselfe. If thou be the sonne of God, come doune from the crosse. Likewise also the high Priestes, mockyng hym, with the Scribes and Elders, sayd; he saved other, hymselfe he cannot save. If he be the kyng of Israel, let hym nowe come doune from the crosse, and we will beleve hym. He trusted in God, let him deliver him nowe, if he wyll have him, for he sayed; I am the sonne of God. The theves also, whiche were crucifyed with him, cast the same in his teethe. From the sixt houre was there darkenesse over all the lande, untill the nynth houre. And aboute the nynth houre, Jesus cryed with a loude voyce, saying, Ely, Ely, lamasabathany? that is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Some of them that stoode there, when they heard that, sayd: This man calleth for Helias [=Elijah]. And straightway one of them ranne and take a sponge, and when he had fylled it full of vyneger, he put it on a reede, and gave hym to drinke. Other sayd: let be, let us see whether Helias will came and deliver hym. Jesus, when he had cried agayne with a loude voyce, yelded up the ghost. And beholde, the vayle of the temple did rent into two partes, from the top to the botome, and the yerth did quake, and the stones rent, and graves did open, and many bodies of saintes, whiche slept, arose and went out of the graves after his resurreccion, and came into the holy citie, and appeared unto many. When the Centurion, and they that were with him watchyng Jesus, sawe the yerthquake and those thynges whiche happened, they feared greatly, saying; Truely, this was the sonne of God. And many women were there, (beholdyng him afarre of,) whiche folowed Jesus from Galilee, ministring unto him: Emong whiche was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joses [Joseph], and the mother of Zebedes children.
[Matthew 26:1- 27:56]
